Eric, welcome back to Talk Python To Me. Great to have you here.
Nice to see you again, Michael.
Nice to see you as well.
Last time we talked about your book, right?
And now your project, your deployment project.
I love talking about deployment because I think it's such an enabling technology or enabling skill.
And your project Django Simple Deploy is certainly in that realm.
Yes, I have appreciated your comments about deployment over the years.
Thanks.
Well, they're a hard one.
My skills in deployment are a hard one.
I kind of want to talk a little bit about the journey for people, but not yet.
Let's get a quick introduction of who is Eric.
What do you do?
What's new in your life since the last time you were on the show?
Oh, gosh.
Yeah, it's all context for this project because this project ties together a lot
the different things that I've done. Short version, I grew up in New Hampshire, moved to New York City,
then moved to Alaska. Just last year, moved to Western North Carolina. And I had a background
in science. I studied physics in college, then got pulled into teaching, spent a long time teaching
math and science, fifth grade through 12th grade, which was super fun because it's not at the level
of undergrad or grad work, but the questions young people ask always make things interesting.
And I got pulled into programming because I always did it on the side. And I kind of felt like,
I always felt like at some point I might focus more on programming and less on classroom teaching.
So for the past five, six years, I've been a full-time writer and programmer.
Yeah, that's awesome.
enjoyable. Yeah. And congrats on the move. You really like to sample different, weather
systems, different environments. you're going to get a different, summer experience
in North Carolina than you might in Alaska. I know it gets warm somewhat there, but
it's warm a lot in North Carolina. Yeah. We're in the mountains so we can have cool nights at least.
Yeah. Lovely. My brother lives there and I think North Carolina is a really new place.
It is. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So let's talk about this going from science to teaching to programming just a little bit, because I did a very similar journey.
I think mine was accelerated in terms of its time frame, but I was in grad school.
I studied math and then taught math, calculus, linear algebra, those kinds of things at universities at GTA.
And then kind of got into programming as part of it.
And then I'm like, wow, this is really fun.
How do I do more of this?
You know what I mean?
And after evaluating, just academia didn't seem like a thing I really wanted to try to chase.
And so I basically took one or two programming classes.
But other than that, I taught myself programming a number of years ago.
That is kind of scary.
Last century, let's say.
And I don't know, I feel totally confident about it these days.
But at first it was, you know, do I belong here?
All the things seem hard.
What am I doing wrong?
Should I have gotten a CS degree?
I don't think any of those things are true.
I think just, you know, as I learned hanging out with CS people, it was hard for them too.
But maybe talk a little bit about your journey, right?
Because I'm sure it would be helpful to other people.
There's many people out there who are doing something somewhat similar.
Yeah, questions about academia kind of steered me this way as well. I studied physics in undergrad
because I started as a chemical engineer because I had a great chemistry class in high school,
but I found that engineering classes felt like being taught how to solve other people's problems.
And my favorite class as an undergrad or as a freshman was physics because it was the only
class that really seemed about truly trying to understand the world. And I love that. So that's
me to focus on physics and i was going to be a particle physicist um but i did not want to be
wanted to spend some time or maybe outside of chicago or whatever yeah okay yeah um and i um
yeah when i was really young i heard about atom smashers i thought somebody like literally had
hammers where they smash atoms um so every very small hammers yes every stage i um learned more
about it was more and more fascinating but i didn't want to be a student forever and so
I want to do something outside of being a student before pursuing the graduate work that would get to
be, get me to be a part of a physicist. So when I was looking what to do, I had been a tutor in
undergrad, and I tutored calculus and physics. And I tutored those classes because I watched
classmates hate, start to hate math and physics because of how they were taught. And that's the
only reason people hated those topics. And it was really humbling because I was 18, 19 years old and
tutoring people in their 30s and 40s who were doing mid-career changes. Speaking of feeling like you
maybe don't necessarily belong there telling someone how to do something when, but at the
same time, you probably knew it really well, right? Yeah, yeah. And I felt like I belonged, but it was
really humbling as far as just sorting out like school systems and where to go. So anyway, that
me into teaching. And I thought I would just teach for a couple years and then go back to
science. But I found that the challenge of reaching everybody in the classroom was as hard
and as satisfying as hard science. And so I just love teaching. I love what it brings up
for other people. And yeah, it's always stayed interesting.
Yeah. For me, I'm sorry, for me, the transition into more focus on programming was my father died.
I've told this story a few times over the years about the origin of the book Python Crash Course,
but my father died in 2011, and my mom asked – he was a programmer.
That's how I first learned to program.
My mom asked me to go through his computer, and she found all these –
she asked me to go through his computer to see if there was anything worth keeping.
And there wasn't, but for me, it was a really personal experience
of seeing all these projects he had started that would never get finished.
And I realized that I had a bunch of those programming projects as well.
um and so that that kind of was a turning point for me to get me out of the practice of just
building a bunch of side projects and start to focus on one or two real world uh projects that
that other people would benefit from that's a great story that's certainly one of the challenges of
you can build a project and you can get it to run but you're maybe halfway there getting it
out to the world in a real world sort of way.
You know, you've got all these challenges of, well,
I need to pick a place to run my app.
Wait a minute, databases?
Why are these migrations so hard?
How do I do migrations?
Like I got the first one up and now I can't change it.
It just breaks.
It doesn't run anymore.
And, you know, there's just all these aspects and not even taking into account
the stuff you got to add to go from a toy project to making it real.
vlogging, error handling, et cetera, et cetera, right?
Yeah.
I mean, this is all a good segue into the topic of today.
I mean, Django Simple Deployed, to kind of put it out there,
for people who haven't heard of it,
it's a package that automates Django deployments.
So if your project runs locally on your computer
and you get to the point where you want to make it public
for other people to use,
if you haven't already gone through the deployment process,
for most people, that's a cliff,
and they kind of just fall off.
I spend all this time learning Django,
all this time building this project they really care about,
solves the problem,
does it better than other people's work
because it's new and whatnot.
And then they go to deploy it
and they find that they have to spend so much time
reading a platform's documentation,
tweaking their settings, adding this file or that file,
and then kind of crossing your fingers
and hoping that it works.
Every time I've gone through that process,
I've kind of thought to myself, this is all just boilerplate.
Like we're just being told to,
everybody's being told to add the same settings,
make the same modifications.
And so I had that shower thought of like,
Automation?
Yeah, yeah.
I had that shower thought of like, okay,
how could we do this configuration from the Django side?
So when we're just looking at the user's computer,
you've got a project that's working locally.
We know it works.
How can we do all the configuration automatically so that you then just push your automatically correctly configured project to your hosting platform?
So Django Simple Deploy does that.
You pip install on Django Simple Deploy.
You need to have a plugin for the platform that you're using.
So Fly.io is a go-to example.
And then you add Django Simple Deploy to installed apps.
And then there's two modes for this project to work.
The fully automated mode is easier to talk about because you run one command.
Python, manage.py, deploy, dash, automate all.
And if you do that and you have that platform CLI installed,
it configures your project, makes a git commit, and pushes your project,
and your project appears in a new browser window, which feels like magic.
That's kind of magical, actually.
Yeah, yeah.
All right.
So I want to talk about what platforms are supported.
But before we do, maybe we could talk more broadly
about just hosting platforms that you've considered,
that you see out there, that people publish Django apps to.
On one hand, we've got really, really straightforward platforms.
On the other, you can get as complicated as you want,
basically.
you play the game of how many AWS services
can you combine into one Django app?
Yeah.
You know, it's kind of like the obfuscated code contest.
How much can you fit under one line that's unlegible,
but still does the thing or whatever, right?
Yeah.
You know, we started this with a conversation
about our backgrounds.
And so kind of weaving this for a little bit
back into that background story,
I do remember one of my transitions
to doing more professional programming work was when I was teaching, I would write programs to
address inefficiencies and difficulties we had in our school for our staff. And so I remember like
exactly this, getting something that like automated report card generation for our staff,
and I got it working on my computer. So like for me, writing report cards was so much easier than
for everybody else. And so I learned Django. I'm like, cool, I can share this with everybody else.
And I tried to deploy it and I could not do it.
It just fell apart.
And I sort of figured it out.
So my first deployment platform was a laptop in a closet in my school connected directly to the school network.
So the deployment worked for people on our network.
And it was only out of the kindness of our IT staff that would allow me to do that.
Clearly not a solution for most people.
very limited it's really hard to deploy let me just deploy my machine to the school yes yes update let
me go to that closet um yeah yeah yeah yeah i'm gonna be here for a few hours i'm programming on
the server yeah so okay heroku is the first one to talk about because heroku was one of the first
platforms that really automated a lot of the devops work and allowed us the classic sales pitch for
for Heroku was run Git push Heroku main
and your project is live.
- Yeah.
- There's always a bit more to it than that,
including that configuration to make your project work
on Heroku.
So the platforms I start thinking about are the ones
that manage the DevOps aspect for you.
Heroku,
fly.io,
platform.sh,
Python anywhere is in there.
So to take a step back even further, this project started because I used Heroku for a while.
In Python Crash Course, the first edition, I taught people, I walked people through deploying a Django project to Heroku.
It's the only part of the book that felt like I'm not really teaching anything.
I'm just telling people to write certain things and add certain files.
A bit of explanation about what it does, but mostly it's, you know, make these changes and cross your fingers that you type them all right.
um so i i wrote um a heroku build pack that that did the um configuration automatically but it did
it on heroku servers so you'd specify this build pack it would load that build back onto heroku
servers and then all your configuration changes would happen on their end and so that what is a
build pack ah i'm not sure that i can tell you it's it's basically i said my i've never built
build pack myself and i've deployed a lot of python so yeah uh the short my short description is it's
a set of um uh programs body of code that uh configures your project for running on that
specific platform got it okay and so typically it's it's generic and it's not targeting
it's not trying to do any changes to your your project uh we won't go further i'll say something
yeah yeah yeah sounds good but the takeaway for that is it felt like doing heroku's work for them
um is it was nice for anybody trying to push django to heroku but that that boundary of like
what's our work what's their work are we doing work for free for them um that's an interesting
question and it really felt like it was skewed towards doing their work right well i've done it
once or twice deployed an app to heroku never for real work but to you know play around with it and
sort of check it out because Heroku was definitely a darling of the Python space and certainly
of the Python tutorials, right?
Because for a long time, they had a free tier.
And so everybody who needed to deploy something was like, here's how you put it on Heroku
to sort of complete the loop and get it out there in the world, right?
Right.
And then, yeah, you know, a testament to Heroku is how long it has worked without a lot of attention from them.
And so they lost a lot of trust in the community, not just from doing away with their free tier.
It's really hard to maintain a free tier.
It just puts a big target on the platform for abuse.
But it's about some reliability issues and communication issues around issues on the platform.
So there was an exodus from Heroku for a while.
And I was working on this automation problem for a while.
And I had that shower thought of like, okay, all that work that I'm doing through the Buildpack on Heroku's end could be done through a management command with NJNGO.
So you can do all the changes to your project on your computer if you know what to do.
So internally, Django simple deploy is just a single management command, that deploy command.
And when you run that command, based on the plugin that you have installed, it knows which platform you're targeting.
And then basically, I've just spent hours poring over the documentation for a few different platforms.
And so we pick up the platform that you're trying to deploy to,
make all the changes necessary for a basic initial deployment to that platform,
and then there's two ways you can push your project.
The fully automated mode puts all those changes into a single commit,
runs that platform's deploy command, and pops up your project in a new window.
Yeah.
And it does.
Go ahead.
The transport mechanism is Git, right?
Good question. Not necessarily.
The transport mechanism is whatever that platform uses.
So for Fly, Django Simple Deploy makes the configuration changes for your project,
and then it calls the Fly Deploy command.
So I don't even have to know what Fly Deploy is using behind the scenes,
because you have the CLI installed.
Simple Deploy calls that.
that deploy command.
For Heroku,
when it gets to that deployment stage,
in the automated mode,
Django Simplify runs
git push Heroku main.
And so it's one of the nice things
about this project,
and part of the reason
it has taken so long to get to 1.0
is it is quite adaptable
to different approaches.
Yeah, that's pretty wild,
because you're just automating
the CLI for that platform, right?
right um and chris chris is commenting uh there should be one obvious way to deploy your django
project to a service yeah he's right the nice thing about this is um django simple deploy becomes this
abstraction layer between your work and the platform so it creates a nice consistent interface
for deploying to a wide range of platforms.
And when a platform inevitably changes their deployment process
or configuration requirements,
as long as one person makes that update to the Django Sim Deploy plugin,
everybody else gets to just keep using that consistent interface
for how you do your initial deployment, which is really, really nice.
Yeah, it is really nice.
You don't have to worry about all the details
and also the ability to move.
without losing all of your expertise, you know?
Right.
This is where it gets really fun to talk about this project
because, you know, people think,
when people first hear about this project,
they think it's just for beginners.
It's just for people who already know deployment.
Yeah.
But where was I going with that?
Oh, so thinking about writers, authors, myself first,
But content creators, tutorial writers, presenters, if you're wanting to include deployment as part of your process that you're teaching people,
then a lot of people have chosen not to do that because as soon as you include deployment, you're now tied to that platform's stability.
As soon as they change their process, you've got to update your materials or it's broken.
And that's not appealing.
So for somebody who uses Django Simply Deploy in their tutorial,
again, as long as one of us keeps the plugin updated to work on that platform,
your learning resources stays the same.
That is really nice.
And whether you're teaching a college class or you're just writing something for your blog,
it is really nice.
Yeah, and I think about the Django Girls workshops.
And so, you know, part of that, the goal of that conclusion of deploying your project,
it's just to see it live.
Like, why are we doing this if we can't see it live?
You don't necessarily want to spend a whole bunch of time focused on deployment.
And so if you can kind of really crunch that into like, okay, we're going to run these commands.
We have a working deployment.
It's not about hiding deployment from people.
Because one of the coolest parts of this project is that it contains all those configuration changes in a single Git commit.
Is there a verbose mode where you get it to all the little steps it's doing and stuff?
Yeah, it is verbose by default.
So basically it streams and dumps all the platform's output as it's deploying,
which is kind of important because if you don't do that,
you just see this blank screen for two, three, seven minutes.
Yeah, it's just sitting there spinning.
Yeah.
But to slow this down, take a step back for a minute.
I've mentioned the automated mode where you include this --automate all.
That's easiest to talk about because it boils down this deployment process to three steps.
I don't actually recommend that for most people because it makes a git commit for you, runs a deploy command, and maybe you want to have a little more control about that process.
There's a configuration only mode, which is every bit as helpful, but it lets you kind of take a little more control.
And so what you do for most platforms, you have to create a resource, basically a deployed project, an empty project on that platform.
And then you run deploy.
And Django Simple Deploy recognizes the resource you just created on that platform, configures your project,
And then it stops.
And so you now have a configured project
and you can run git diff
and you get to see all the configuration
that were changes that were made on your behalf.
So you don't have to just trust it.
Yeah, yeah.
So when I shared this on the Django Discord yesterday,
somebody was excited about it.
And then I said something about that commit that was made.
And they said, oh, it makes commits for you.
Oh, I'm not sure I want to use that.
I said, okay, you can do the longer mode
where you get to review that.
And then you can see all the files
that were created for that platform.
You can see the settings changes
that were made to make your project work.
And then you can choose to make that commit.
You can choose to push it or revert it.
Even if you use the automated mode,
it's still all the configuration is one commit.
And so you can just revert that commit
and you're right back to your project.
I'll throw one more piece in there right away.
One of the priorities of the project
is that it does not change the local behavior of your project.
And so when I run the test suite,
it tests that all the configuration changes
are correct for the target platform,
but it also runs run server again locally
and makes sure that we haven't impacted
the local running of your project.
Oh, interesting.
It'll run it to make sure it basically starts.
Nice.
Yeah.
Yeah, you know, this automated versus config sort of deal,
it reminds me a little bit of how maybe DBAs feel about ORMs.
You know, like they're like, oh, you can't just let it run arbitrary queries
against my database.
Like, how do we know it's doing the right thing?
And I'm sure you feel that way for a while, you know, but eventually,
all right, we've reviewed them.
They're fine, right?
So maybe this config thing you do a couple of times, you're like, yeah, that's what I would do anyway.
Just run it, right?
Yeah.
What else are you going to do?
You're probably going to create a script that does the things you expect it to do anyway for yourself as a bash script or something, right?
And so might as well be a Python script.
Yeah.
I mean, it's funny hearing you talk about this because this project started as a pile of bash scripts.
I got a pile of bash scripts on my server.
They do things.
Yeah.
one of the um pre 1.0 tasks was a long issue that was just about converting all these shell scripts
to to python and mostly that was about creating making this work cross-platform so it's basically
taken me like four years to get this to 1.0 and it's that 80 20 principle turned into like 595
principle um yeah uh so another reason so a good thing to to kind of move into
And another reason it took so long to get to 1.0
was originally this was all one library.
And so it was just Django simple deploy.
And originally you would run manage.py deploy
--platform, fly.io.
And so the entire project contained all the code
for all the different platforms.
And that felt better than the original project
just targeting Heroku 'cause you have choice,
but it felt like a nightmare for maintenance.
It's anytime any project changes,
it's going to need an update and it's just going to grow exponentially.
It becomes combinatorially complex in terms of dependencies.
Yeah. Which is not a good order of magnitude or, and yeah,
it's not good.
Yeah. So I had some people kind of, you know,
very kindheartedly nudging me towards just doing a 1.0 release to get over
that.
that fear of a 1.0 release but it was always about having i had a vision
um that the mature version of this project should be plug-in based so the core project django simple
deploy is small um it's platform agnostic all it does is inspect your project inspect your system
and then hand off the rest of the work to a plugin and so currently there's a plugin targeting fly.io
plugin for platform.sh platform for heroku i have a proof of concept um plugin for
code red and i'm working on a proof of concept for digital ocean um awesome yeah so many cool
things to talk about with this um yeah yeah before we go i i do want to maybe just uh
go through some of these these hosts and let you give a talk about maybe why they're included which
ones are there's stuff out there obviously that's not included why is it not included right so heroku
obvious especially when you started when they had the free tier and stuff like that
uh i i kind of want to get them i know people are angry at him i understand that but also i kind of
want to give them a little bit of a pass like offering free hosting to the world where people
just put up malware and other badness and use the trust of your domain to sort of leverage leverage
that is it's challenging and i don't know i understand people are frustrated with them but
that that's tough so heroku platform of the service you push your stuff up you say here's my
code here's how you start it run it for me please there's not a lot of Linux there's not a lot of
shell right they kind of take care of that for you yes they do and they're still yeah uh i've had
conversations with people who um with founders of a number of these platforms over the years
because it's always interesting to talk about this um and platforms would love to see an easier way
to deploy jingo projects um one of those founders said something really insightful at one point and
i appreciated the honesty he said we're all trying to be second best for beginners because if you if
you draw that crowd you're drawing more support than they benefit in the short term and so for
yeah for a long time for roku paid that cost they were willing to be the go-to for everybody so
there's still a lot of projects running long-term on heroku i know some important python ones that
are there yeah yeah yeah okay and then we got fly.io and platform sh you know what's the story
with these i have honestly i haven't used either of them i've heard of them i haven't used them
So the selling point for Fly.io is they're an edge-based platform.
Interesting.
Okay.
Yeah.
They take your, if I'm saying this right, they take your project and they push your application code to a bunch of different nodes.
And so your code is-
Kind of like a CDN, right?
Yeah.
CDN for your application code.
And so your code is right close to your end users.
And so I don't need it, but they've built it well enough that I can just push a project there and it works.
And I'm a big fan of if your project does what you need it to, is it a good question? Is it good enough?
And so it's been good enough for me for a lot.
And I know it's targeting some more complex use cases.
So many questions.
Yeah.
It's so interesting.
Well, the first thing that comes to mind is what about databases, right?
If your app is running, yeah, you got to have some way to correlate and centralize and make the consistency of the database and all that work.
They've had some fantastic people working for them and they have some fantastic blog posts.
So they've done really interesting cutting edge work around distributed SQLite databases.
And so, yeah, they are quite familiar with that question and they have answered it well.
they are entering well if you if you can answer that question well then you can get some stuff
that flies you know i mean i guess that's the name i didn't even do that on purpose i've been using
bunny.net which is a really nice really nice cdn platform but just for static content you know not
for not for application code that talks to the database and you know i understand how you would
the database but the challenge is if you have chatty rights right you know if you're all of a
sudden you're pushing pushing your database away from your app which has its own sort of latency
and stuff but what an interesting idea okay and uh platform.sh uh platform.sh started as a php i
believe started as a php only platform but then expanded to um support other languages and so
they have been sponsors of DjangoCon for a long time.
And I really enjoy working with their platform.
Deployment is pretty straightforward.
And then, you know, one of the things I look for
in these platform as a service is,
so once you push it,
I'm very happy to have them managing the DevOps work.
I also want to be able to like get into the server
and run commands and see what's going on.
And so they make it easy to do that.
Yeah, if things are not starting
or they're crashing or something,
sometimes just go and just 30 seconds at a glance,
it's a log file or somebody, oh yeah.
Or maybe why is that file?
That file is actually missing.
Oh, that's weird.
Let me see if I can just get that.
And then you're back to like, okay,
back to the platform as a service and you're good.
- Yeah, and that's the, you know,
platform as a service certainly works for people
who know nothing about, you know,
hopping into a server and running commands.
But they're also for like people who know how to do that
and don't want to do that.
And so a service like platform.sh that makes it easy to do both is also, I see it as an onboarding for people who have something worth deploying, don't know DevOps yet, but letting them hop in and start to do that.
It's pretty interesting.
Yeah, it's very interesting.
Okay.
So I can run Python manage.py deploy --automate all.
And that will take my app and put it into whatever destination you pick, right?
Of those three.
Right.
For these platforms as a service, a lot of times you have to have a database.
Sometimes that's a managed Postgres or whatever.
You might have data that has to import initially.
You know, if you're like, well, here's all the counties in the United States and we have to query them for stuff.
So we preload that at first.
How does all that get connected and happen?
If I had no database, I just have a pure Django app that just runs Python.
easy i see how this works but then there's like there's settings and stuff here that vary by
production versus dev yeah fun question um so i've done most of the development work on
jango simple deploy i've actually run sprints at several picons and several jango cons
and this project has brought together like eight to 15 people at each sprint
it draws some interest and so i the project would not be where it is without those contributions
A lot of those people have made some contributions and, you know, not done a whole lot outside of the conferences, but that whole group of people has been available to just bounce ideas off of.
And so a lot of the pre-1.0 work was also like me getting rid of all the baggage that just kind of only made sense to me or you really need to have, you know, years of contact with the project to make sense of it.
And so now it's at a place where like the structure is pretty consistent.
And so one of the things I'm looking forward to is, you know,
somebody else who knows fly.io managing the fly.io plugin more than me.
And so they don't need to go deal with Chango Simple Deploy.
They can focus on the parts of the script that do the things you were just
talking about.
So all the configuration has been largely my choice, you know,
okay on heroku we'll choose this postgres instance because it's cheaper because it lets people get
started um it's possible for somebody to either take the heroku plugin and add a few more cli
flags to give you a bit more choice or just write your own heroku plugin and so right now the the
plugin for heroku is dsd-heroku somebody else could do like dsd heroku dash large and it's meant
for scaling large or deploying large-scale group projects um and so that's not i don't want to do
that work they should write their own that's if you have a use case that you know well and you
want to automate um simple deploy just becomes this again abstraction layer for you know you have
a consistent interface for um running that deployment from from within django yeah there's
a nice plugin model which really opens things up i suppose the answer probably the short answer is
probably well the django orm will create the database structure for you if you could just
tell it where the database is right right and i know certain apps i've built if they have data that
has to be pre-loaded i'll just have a little check like hey is this table got any data in it if not
run the load up the database the first time otherwise assume it's all good and keep going
and that pretty much handles it yeah i think you know these kind of two directions i'll take this
um you know a short list of the projects i've done over the years they tend to be smaller but they
tend to be impactful so one project um automated report cards for students i used to work with
struggling students students who were plenty smart but life had happened and they had gotten off track
with school and so they just had holes in their graduation requirements and so
those students wanted to graduate but they didn't know where to focus their their efforts and so
looking at a transcript was really hard because it's just a bunch of like letters and numbers
so i wrote a program that automated uh generation of visual transcripts so i'd read their text-based
transcript and then give them basically a chart with a bunch of like gauges and you just look at
it in 30 seconds know which classes you needed to focus on um and it also went from deficiencies
to strengths so traditionally we talked to students who are struggling and saying you
you need to do this you need to do that you could see where they needed to do their work but you
You could also see where they had been shining.
You could see where the strengths were.
And so I wrote a project.
I worked with whale researchers.
And people don't know this.
Sperm whales have learned to pick the fish off of, take a step back.
People catch halibut, fish for halibut,
by putting like literally miles long cables on the ocean floor or lines
with a hook every six to 10 feet.
And so you put a thousand hooks on the ocean floor,
leave it overnight, go pull it.
And that's how you catch halibut.
And sperm whales have learned to listen for the sound
of the transmission changes when somebody puts their boat
into gear to pull those hooks.
They swim towards that sound
and they just pick the fish off those lines.
- Wow.
- And so these researchers were starting to put
transponders on boats that would allow anybody
saw sperm whale to report that and then you could kind of time your your fishing sets to be away from
the sperm whales and so i wrote a project that just like these researchers didn't know how to get their
data from one place to another and so i just wrote a small django project that um listened for that
data and gave them a visible place where they could go to it and share it um and one other oh
i lived in southeast alaska we were having increasing landslides more more frequent landslides
and more impactful and so i wrote a small project that examines real-time stream data stream gauge
data and turns that into a measure of landside risk um i think i would talk about that last year
at pycon all those projects are small they're never going to scale to like millions of users
they all need a database and so they all fit this model of something like i personally would build
And if I didn't know deployment, those would not have ended up being useful.
And so this tool takes all these people out there right now who are getting the skills to build something that works locally.
And they don't have to like go through that three weeks to three months of learning how to deploy things.
So I appreciate you bringing up the questions of like what happens with these larger scale projects.
But there's also a whole class before you even get there of projects that are that would make the world better if they could be easily deployed.
such such a challenge because if you go down the there's so many paths that people get led down
that are not good paths you know it's sort of the architectural equivalent i guess even just
the devops equivalent of you're not microsoft you're not google you're not netflix you probably
don't need the chaos monkey running around your whale research project right right yeah but people
read that and they're like well i saw a really awesome conference talk and people loved it about
how they they had like geo replication of their database and stuff you're like yes yes interesting
not for you yeah so the other direction that's interesting to to finish out this discussion um
so i'm targeting a vps right now um i have deployed chingo project to digital ocean just on the bare
vps for people less familiar with that virtual private server it's basically a brand new virtual
Linux machine that you push your project to.
And so this is more complicated because rather than just like making a few
configuration changes to your project and then running a platforms deploy command,
you have to do that whole like, you know, update the server, install Django,
set up a Git push if you want to do that approach.
Make the right like port changes and whatnot, expose that.
So it's more work for me to get that proof of concept done.
But once it's done, you know, the work I'm doing to write a plugin for DigitalOcean would work just as well for Hetzner, just as well for Linode.
And then it opens up to all the different approaches that people take to deployment.
One of the interesting questions about Django Simple Deploy is what are the boundaries?
So what is simple?
And I don't even I don't know the answer to that yet.
It shouldn't become too bloated.
It shouldn't like re-implement the entire CLI for a platform,
but the bounds are pretty large.
So you could have a DigitalOcean, you know,
that targets, you know, NGINX Benicorn.
You could have one that targets using the Doku approach.
You could have one that targets external databases.
There's really, it's a pretty open platform for automating deployment processes.
Yeah, absolutely.
Maybe once you knock out one of those virtual servers, it's really, really close to seeing, well, anything that can run a Linux VM pretty much can do it.
And you were talking about Nginx.
You know, you might, I don't know, have you considered Caddy?
CaddyServer.com?
As I was saying Nginx, I was like, oh, wait, there's another one that I should be saying.
Well, I use Nginx for all of my stuff because it's gotten over the years,
gotten more and more complicated.
However, you've got to run, you've got to independently manage Let's Encrypt,
and there's this sort of scaling up process.
So first, you've got to put the non-encrypted version up,
so that cert bot and all the Let's Encrypt stuff can find it.
Then you create the SSL certificate.
Then you change the configuration again
because it won't run saying it's SSL
until it actually has this.
Like there's this scaffolding step
that's always messy.
And if I think like easy getting started for people,
Caddy, which manages the security and all that
and has a real simple configuration language,
it seems like it might be a good option.
And it has 62,000 GitHub stars.
I think a person or two uses it.
You know, that's kind of neat.
Yeah.
Last week, before I started the DigitalOcean plugin,
I asked on Mastodon how people are deploying to VPS these days.
And Caddy was one of the things that came up.
It was super interesting to see the range of approaches that people are using.
So, you know, as I go through this,
I'm kind of asking the question for basic initial deployment
for somebody new to this platform,
what are some sane choices?
So
Caddy or Nginx, Postgres
or SQLite. So I'll make
those choices and
one of the open questions that I don't have
clear answers to is
where are the boundaries around those plugins?
So I'll certainly
implement a --DB
flag that lets you choose
Postgres or SQLite
but I don't want to do
a flag for dash dash
approach, daku, whatnot.
At some point, it makes more sense to have other people write other plugins and just foster that plugin ecosystem.
Yeah.
So another consideration, and Kim out in the audience was hinting at this before, and it's certainly the way that I'm doing things these days, is Docker.
So let me just give you an example.
Like, you can go all in and you can run on, like, the EKS and all these kinds of things.
You can go way, way deep on it.
Or you can just do stuff as simple as like, hey, I want the front-end web server to be caddy.
I could install caddy on the server using apt or whatever.
But then those kind of update more slowly.
You have less control over it.
You could just as equally well run a caddy Docker image on that machine
and have basically a zero-touch experience on the server itself
other than just having a Docker thing there, right?
And you can do whatever you want to that Docker image.
You could even have a catty Django simple deploy one based off their original one or, you know, things like that where you've got it exactly configured.
What's the story with Docker?
And how have you been thinking about that?
Because once you start to go to virtual server, you start to get into some of these processes and some of these ideas.
Yeah, great question.
And it certainly has come up multiple times.
My main experience with Docker is working with Fly
because Fly is a Docker-based approach.
I have not written my own Docker files,
but I have learned about them.
And so short answer,
Docker is an approach to deployment
and there's nothing stopping anybody
from writing a plugin that has a Docker-based approach.
This kind of gets back to the question of like,
what's next?
Yeah, it definitely does.
Yeah, I'm going to finish the plugin for a proof of concept plugin for
digital ocean.
I'll take it to the 1.0 version of that approach so people can reliably
deploy to digital ocean with a particular articulated approach.
It'll be, it'll probably be, catty choice of SQLite or progres.
and then I'm probably like my best approach is probably to back
of writing more plugins because i could spend the next few years just enjoy exploring all these
platforms and approaches but i really should back off just continue to let people know the project
exists make sure these set of plugins have started continue to work and then just continue to tighten
up the internals so that it's easier and easier to for other people to write plugins i can already
tell from the way you're talking like you could you i have a dsd plugin template repository it's in
the the django simple deploy organization and so if you want to write a plugin um you don't start
from scratch you um download that that repository for the dsd plugin template you don't clone it
because there's no upstream for it download it um install it alongside simple deploy in development
mode and you can run tests right away so you run an integration test and it just verifies that like
it gives you a couple questions what's the name of your platform what's the command you want people
to use um do you support automate all and then it it writes a new plugin for you with all the
plumbing there you run tests verify that it works and then you start writing your platform specific
code and so there's a bit of a learning curve for developers where you got to learn like okay what
But, you know, Django simple deploy has a module called plugin utils.
And so that's how you like write output in a way that's consistent with the rest of the project, feeds into its logging.
There's a run quick command for small changes you're making to the project.
There's a run slow command for things like deploy to make sure, you know, we're capturing output, streaming it and whatnot.
So you learn those utilities, but you pretty quickly get to a place where you're just focusing on your expertise or opinion about how to approach deployment for a particular platform.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm sure there's a ton out there.
People can be like, well, what about my platform, right?
I'm sure there's some folks who are experts at wherever they're deploying their code that could maybe come and create a plugin, right?
Absolutely.
And somebody tried to write in support for Google, what was it, Google Cloud?
Yeah, Google, yeah, GCP, Google Cloud.
A couple of years ago.
But that was back when there was no plug-in system.
And so it got bogged down in just like all the back and forth between core and that platform.
These days, that person could just download that plugin template and start focusing on the platform.
Yeah, awesome.
I'm sure that there's people out there thinking, hey, we could do this for Azure.
Hey, we could do this for AWS as well, right?
You know, I'm really blown away about how many people choose the hyperscale clouds, given how complicated and expensive they are.
There was some stat in one of the recent surveys.
I don't know if it was the TSF chip brains one or just a more general developer one.
Anyway, it doesn't matter.
One of the bigger surveys, 75, 78% of the people used either Azure, AWS, or GCP.
Yeah.
And I look at those, I'm like, geez, I don't think 75% of the apps out there need the stuff
that those are offering.
And it's so, so much more expensive.
I don't think people fully understand how much more expensive it is to get like a VM on one versus the other.
I did some, I think, you know, it always depends on which one you pick or something.
But for a $20 Hetzner server, it's, I think, $60 on DigitalOcean, $200 something on AWS,
and I think pushing up towards $300 for Azure.
And what you get when you go up to these prices, you don't get a better experience.
You get a worse one because all the complexity, all the stuff that you got to deal with.
It's not like, well, just here's your server, go with it.
Like, oh, no, no.
There's all these other things you got to bring in.
And it just super surprises me that that's the case.
And so, yeah, I don't know.
Yeah, I built working support for Azure early on.
I worked for Voco originally, then I made it to work for one other platform, which was Fly.
Like, okay, cool, this isn't tied to one platform.
And then the rule of three, I did a platform in a stage.
Like, okay, now I've gotten all the generalities out.
Moving over to VPS as opposed to platform as a service opens up a few new things,
but I can put those in internally without making breaking changes in the project.
Yeah.
And Azure does have a platform as a service offering, for example.
I'm not, I think, I'm sure AWS does as well, although I haven't tried to use it.
um yeah so i mean but there are no i don't know i well i i also focused on um heroku one of the
things for heroku is it's one of the fastest deployments i've used um they've kind of got
it dialed um as you're always taking like 10 or 15 minutes so it's hard to do development work
against that um kim kim posted this interesting question or comment the various deployment
mechanisms presumably all need credentials are these provided as env variables many beginners
don't know what it has to do with these this project may help i agree completely um so this
project is like i'm approaching vps credentials around ssh as env variables because that's what
i've used in the past um variables being files that have basically key values that you don't
put into git but you create on the platform right something like that yeah and so the quick start
guide will say like export these two environment variables you know your your ip address and your
your host password uh maybe a username if you've already created a non-root user
but it goes through and it basically if you don't give it a username it tries
the default django user username then it goes through root and whatnot um
i it's a little humbling to make these plugins because it shows you exactly where my current
knowledge is at but it's also a starting place that works and so if somebody looks at this and
says like hey you really shouldn't be using the nv variables here's the current best way to use
to deal with credentials we could write that into the plugin and as kim is pointing out it steers
all beginning all people from that point forward um into that better usage and it also comes back
to that idea that this isn't just for beginners think about all the people out there who are using
the nv variables because that's what they learned and maybe if there's something better and the
latest version of the plugins cheers them towards that as well um yeah i've often found there are
things that are good for beginners that end up being really helpful for everybody else as well
and this project feels like one of those yeah that's very cool certainly making your life easier
everybody wants that right yes yes yeah yeah automated a lot of things okay well i mean i'll
I'll throw one more thought out there.
Like as you're working on the server, the virtual server side of things,
I think there's a lot of opportunities to leverage Docker to say like,
if you could build an image that is 90% the way there,
you could just say run this Docker image,
run this Docker container based on this image.
And it doesn't even matter what server it's on.
I think there's some interesting stuff you could do with Docker here.
Oh, absolutely.
Yes.
I'll let you go down that path.
I certainly have enjoyed it.
Yeah. So what's next? What do you have to do? By the way, I don't know if we called it out,
this is kind of the 1.0, you mentioned it in passing, but this is the 1.0 milestone sort of
thing, right? Yeah. The 1.0 for this is really about like people should be able to trust that
it's reliable from this point forward. It does work, works on all three OSs for the officially
supported plugins i'm going to try to keep a list of plugins that i'm aware of that are being worked
on um and sort out that whole you know how do you manage an ecosystem um but you know i've also
thought of this as like a gift to the django community um i wanted to release 1.0 on christmas
um so i couldn't quite get there yeah um you know uh if you listen to django chat
when the word deployment comes up there's always this corona and that's been there for 20 years
excited as well yes he loves it yes um but so this problem has been in django in the jingo world
for 20 years how do we deal with the fact that it's hard to deploy django harder than php harder
than some other things and i really think this project kind of answers that question or goes a
long way towards entering it um and there's a good number people in the django community
who have been kind of cheerleading this project for a while um because if they've seen
it i've announced it in public i've kind of done the development in public and at jingo cons whatnot
yeah so awesome i'm gonna i'm gonna step back from creating more plugins i'm gonna continue to refine
the internals and i'm gonna go back to my own like actual jingo projects you're gonna use it rather
Yes.
That's the way to do it.
I think one of the bits of magic of Python and why it's so popular is it's very welcoming to beginners.
People coming from science, like we talked about, or other things, they kind of get sucked in and they're like,
huh, it's nicer. Maybe I'll stay.
And these kind of things sort of tell that same story for web developers.
There might be a point where people outgrow this or they don't, but they might.
But it might have gotten them that year's worth of experience running a server or running a platform as a service app and dealing with all of that so that they're then ready to take whatever next step that needs to be taken, if it needs to.
Yeah, it really smooths out that learning process because you just described it.
You know, Python's welcoming people to learn Python.
They say, oh, I want a web front end for this.
Going back to my father not releasing his projects, he was a software developer in the 70s and 80s.
And so for him, deployment was, I need to make my projects so good it can be printed to 10,000 physical copies.
So it's no fault to him for having those unreleased projects.
So the pathway these days is people learn Python, say, okay, I'm solving my problem with Python.
I want a web front end so other people can access it.
They learn Django because they already know Python.
That's all smooth.
Django is a bit hard, but you can learn it if you know Python.
And then they get to deployment, and it's this entirely different class of things to learn.
And that's where that cliff comes in.
And so simple deploy tends to smooth out that.
It basically removes that cliff.
And so you go right from where you are.
I have a project working on my system.
Now it's working on a road server.
I don't fully understand it.
but it's much easier to poke around at the working deployment than poke around
at something that you're trying to do that's broken and people end up giving up.
So yeah, I'm excited about like, yeah,
I'm excited about like opening that pathway for people.
Yeah, absolutely. That's awesome. Nice work. And thanks for doing it.
There's, there's already so much to learn to build a web app,
to even go from my know Python to a web app because CSS databases,
you know html javascript there's already enough that you don't need to throw Linux and cdns and
all that at people at the same time right let them let them go across the chasm and they'll
figure it out on the other side all right well thanks for this project maybe final call to action
people want to get started with it what do you tell them um go take a look at the docs there's a
friendly quick start docs show you how it's used and there's pretty comprehensive contributing docs
if you're curious to write a plugin or how about otherwise yeah i i guess let's close it out with
this if you got a platform out there if you're somebody like fly.io but a different one consider
creating one of these plugins it blows my mind Eric i don't know how you feel but there'll be some
major major service and you'll go there and they're like well you can use our our javascript api or
or you can just write it from scratch.
Like how much effort is it for one of these companies to spend a week,
create a package for their thing and make it go.
And I think, you know, a sort of a similar call to action, like, Hey,
if you want to make it real easy for people to just switch to your platform,
you know,
consider following the steps that you talked about to build a plugin for this.
Right.
Yeah. Yeah.
And for anybody getting anybody interested in writing a plugin,
feel free to reach out.
I'm happy to, to make sure that works the first time people do it.
yeah absolutely all right thanks for being here again talk to you thank you michael yeah bye